.\" dummy line
.TH DRSCHEME 1 "February 2007"
.UC 4
.SH NAME
drscheme \- The PLT Scheme programming environment
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B drscheme
[
.I Xoption ...
]
[
.I file ...
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I DrScheme
is the PLT Scheme
programming environment.
.PP
.I DrScheme
opens the files given as command-line arguments.
.pp
For further information on
.IR DrScheme ,
please consult the on-line
documentation and other information available at
.PP
.ce 1
http://www.drscheme.org/
.SH X OPTIONS
When running in X11, DrScheme accepts the following standard
.IR Xoption s:
.B -display
.IR disp ,
.B -geometry
.IR geom ,
.B -bg
.IR color ,
.B -background
.IR color ,
.B -fg
.IR color ,
.B -foreground
.IR color ,
.B -fn
.IR font ,
.B -font
.IR font ,
.BR -iconic ,
.B -name
.IR name ,
.BR -rv ,
.BR -reverse ,
.BR +rv ,
.B -selectionTimeout
.IR time ,
.BR -synchronous ,
.B -title
.IR name ,
.B -xnllanguage
.IR lang ,
.B -xrm
.IR file .
.PP
In addition, the option
.B -singleInstance
is treated like an X option (it must appear before all other
options), and it runs MrEd in single-instance mode.
In single-instance mode, when an existing instance
is running with the same host and executable name, all non-option
arguments are treated as file names and sent to the 
existing instance.
.PP

.SH FILES
.I DrScheme
looks for its libraries using the environment variable
PLTCOLLECTS.  If this variable is not defined,
the installation directory is found automatically.
See the documentation for details.
.PP
Please consult your local administrator to determine whether
the on-line documentation has been installed locally.
.SH BUGS
Submit bug reports via
.ce 1
help-desk (encouraged),
or via the web
.ce 1
http://bugs.plt-scheme.org/ (discouraged)
or by e-mail to
.ce 1
bugs@plt-scheme.org (discouraged)
.SH AUTHOR
.I DrScheme
was implemented by PLT.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR help-desk(1),
.BR mred(1),
.BR mzscheme(1)
