.TH TEX2PAGE 1 "2007-02-21"  \"last change
.SH NAME

tex2page \- makes Web pages from LaTeX and plain-TeX documents 

.SH SYNOPSIS

    tex2page --help
    tex2page --version
    tex2page <pathname>

.SH DESCRIPTION

The command

    tex2page <pathname>

converts the TeX source file <pathname> to the HTML file
<jobname>.html, where <jobname> is the basename of <pathname>.
Some auxiliary HTML files and some image files may also be
created.  

The argument <pathname> can be a full or relative pathname.  If
the latter, it is reckoned relative to the current directory.
The extension may be omitted if it is .tex. 

In order to resolve cross-references, it may be necessary to
invoke tex2page a couple of times.  The log displayed on the
console will inform you if such is the case.  This log is also
saved in the file <jobname>.hlog.

If tex2page is called with the option `--help', it prints a help
message and exits.

If tex2page is called with the option `--version', it prints
version information and exits.

If tex2page is called without an argument, or if the argument is
neither a valid option nor an existing file, then tex2page prints
a brief help message and exits.  If you repeatedly (i.e., five or
more times) call it faultily despite its helpful advice, tex2page
will visibly lose its patience.

The complete documentation for tex2page is included in the
tex2page distribution, and may also be viewed on the Web at 

     http://www.ccs.neu.edu/~dorai/tex2page/tex2page-doc.html

.SH SEARCH PATH FOR TeX FILES 

tex2page uses the same search path as TeX to search for
\einput and \eopenin files.  The default search path is
implementation-dependent but can be changed by setting the
environment variable TEXINPUTS to a list of colon-separated
directories.  (If you wish to merely prepend your list to the
default list, end your list with a colon.)  

Add two trailing forward slashes to any directory in TEXINPUTS
that you want to recursively search all subdirectories of.

If the environment variable TIIPINPUTS is set, tex2page will
use the TIIPINPUTS value as its search path instead of
TEXINPUTS.  TIIPINPUTS  does not support the double-slash
mechanism of TEXINPUTS.

.SH EDITING ON ERROR 

If tex2page encounters a fatal error in the document, it
displays the prompt

    Type e to edit file at point of error; x to quit
    ?

If you type x, tex2page immediately exits.

If however you type e, a text editor is fired up, showing the
offending file -- which may or may not be the main input file --
at the line containing the error.  The particular editor chosen
and the arguments with which it is called depends on the
environment variables TEXEDIT or EDITOR.

If the environment variable TEXEDIT is set, tex2page uses its
string value as the editor call to use.  A possible value for
TEXEDIT is "vim +%d %s".  This calls the editor vim with %s
replaced by the offending file's name, and %d replaced by the
number of the offending line.

If TEXEDIT is not set, the value of the environment variable
EDITOR is chosen as the editor.  Unlike TEXEDIT
which contains the editor call as a template, EDITOR contains
simply the editor's name.  If EDITOR is also not set, vi is
chosen as the editor.  

The editor specified in EDITOR is called with the arguments 
" +<n> <f>", where <f> is the offending file's name and <n> is the
offending line number.  It is not possible to alter the way the
file and line arguments are supplied, but fortunately this style
is accepted by vi, emacs, and all their clones.  If you use an
editor that requires a different argument style, use TEXEDIT.

.SH DIRECTORY FOR HTML PAGES 

By default, tex2page generates its output HTML files in the
current directory.  You can specify a different directory by
naming it in one of the following files:

    <jobname>.hdir in the current directory, or
    .tex2page.hdir in the current directory, or
    .tex2page.hdir in your home directory;

where <jobname> is the basename of the input document.  The
first of these three files that exists overrides the rest.

The name in the .hdir file can be, or contain, the TeX
control-sequence \ejobname, which expands to <jobname>, the
basename of the input document.

.SH DOCUMENT-SPECIFIC MACROS

Before processing a TeX source file whose basename is
<jobname>, tex2page will automatically load the file
<jobname>.t2p, if it exists.  <jobname>.t2p is a good place
to put macros that are specific to the HTML version of the
document.

.SH GENERAL MACROS

tex2page recognizes some commands that are not supplied in
the LaTeX or plain-TeX formats -- typically these are
commands that add value to the HTML output.  In order to keep
an input document that uses these extra commands processable
by TeX, working TeX definitions are provided in the TeX macro
file tex2page.tex and the LaTeX macro package file
tex2page.sty.  Copy these macro files from the tex2page
distribution to a directory in your TEXINPUTS. 

Plain-TeX documents can use

    \einput tex2page

while LaTeX documents can use

    \eusepackage{tex2page}

.SH SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS

tex2page runs on Scheme or Common Lisp.  It may also make use
of the following programs: BibTeX, MakeIndex, Ghostscript,
Dvips, MetaPost, and the NetPBM library.

Out of the box, tex2page runs in Racket, but the distribution
includes configuration information to allow tex2page to run on
a variety of Scheme and Common Lisp implementations.  See file
INSTALL.

.SH BUGS

Email to dorai @ ccs.neu.edu.

.SH SEE ALSO

tex(1), latex(1), mzscheme(1), bibtex(1), makeindex(1L),
mpost(1).

.SH COPYRIGHT

Copyright 1997-2012 by Dorai Sitaram.

Permission to distribute and use this work for any purpose is
hereby granted provided this copyright notice is included in
the copy.  This work is provided as is, with no warranty of any
kind.

.nx
